---
title: Regular polytopes
author: Coxeter
year: 1948
---

# Preface

有趣的引用：

- Klein's Lectures on the Icosahedron
- Manning's Geometry of four dimensions
- Sommerville's Geometry of n dimensions

有趣的将要学到的主题：

> Probably my own best contribution is the invention of the
> "graphical" notation (§ 5-6), which facilitates the enumeration of
> groups generated by reflections (§ 11\*5), of the polytopes derived
> from these groups by Wythoff's construction (§ 11-6), ...

- 对比 Coxeter 1957 年的 Generators and relations for discrete groups

# i. polygons and polyhedra

## 1.1 regular polygons

> To be precise, we define a p-gon as a circuit of ρ line-segments
> (A1, A2), (A2, A3), ..., (Ap, A1) joining consecutive pairs of ρ
> points A1, A2, ..., Ap. The segments and points are called sides and
> vertices.

上面引入的术语，也许可以在写程序的时候用：

- circuit
- segment
- side
- vertice

说 p-gon 的时候，其实是有歧义的：

- p-gon 指包含其内部（interior）的二维类 disk 图形。
- p-gon 指不包含其内部的一维边界。

> A convex p-gon, which may be described (in terms of Cartesian
> coordinates) by a system of ρ linear inequalities, these
> inequalities must be consistent but not redundant.
>
> а(k)*х + b(k)*y = с(k) // (k = 1, 2, . . . , p).

> A rhomb is equilateral, and a rectangle is equiangular.
> A plane p-gon is said to be regular
> if it is both equilateral and equiangular.
> It is then denoted by `{p}`.
>
> - `{3}` is an equilateral triangle
> - `{4}` is a square
> - `{5}` is a regular pentagon

在实现的时候，要设计更可规模化的表达式 `new RegularPolygon(p)`，
而不能滥用 `{p}`。

> A regular polygon is easily seen to have a centre, from which all
> the vertices are at the same distance `R(0)`, while all the sides
> are at the same distance `R(1)`.  This means that there are two
> concentric circles, the circum-circle and in-circle, wrhich pass
> through the vertices and touch the sides, respectively.

```
let gon = new RegularPolygon(p)

let r0 = circumCircleRadius(gon)
let r1 = inCircleRadius(gon)

exteriorAngle(gon) = 2 * Pi / p
interiorAngle(gon) = Pi - exteriorAngle(gon)

area(gon) = TODO
perimeter(gon) = TODO
```

TODO Cartesian coordinates of vertices.
TODO Argand diagram.

> It is sometimes desirable to extend our definition of a p-gon by
> allowing the sides to be curved ; e.g., we shall have occasion to
> consider spherical polygons, whose sides are arcs of great circles
> on a sphere.

## 1.2 polyhedra

> For polyhedron,
>
> 1. Every side of each polygon belongs also to just one other polygon,
> 2. The polygons surrounding each vertex form a single circuit
>    (to exclude anomalies such as two pyramids with a common apex).

Note that, by this definition,
a polyhedron can be a partition of torus,
i.e. not simple-connected.

> Examples of polyhedra:
>
> - Pyramid -- a point and a p-gon can be joinedby ρ triangles
> - Prism --  two equal p-gons canbe joined by ρ rectangles
> - anti-prism

## 1.3 the five platonic solids

- A convex polyhedron is said to be regular
  if its faces are regular and equal,
  while its vertices are all surrounded alike.

- If its faces are {p}'s,
  q surrounding each vertex,
  the polyhedron is denoted by {p, q}.

  |        | name         | points | edges | faces |
  | ------ | ------------ | ------ | ----- | ----- |
  | {3, 3} | tetrahedron  | 4      | 6     | 4     |
  | {3, 4} | octahedron   | 6      | 12    | 8     |
  | {4, 3} | cube         | 8      | 12    | 6     |
  | {3, 5} | icosahedron  | 12     | 30    | 20    |
  | {5, 3} | dodecahedron | 20     | 30    | 12    |

## 1.4 graphs and maps

- a polyhedron may be regarded as a map,
  i.e. as the partition of an unbounded surface into polygonal regions.
  the surface might be sphere, torus, etc.

  - **Xie**:
    thus the 'map' can be viewed as polytopelization of space.

- a map has a dual map on the surface.
  Corresponding to a p-gonal face of the given map,
  the dual map will have a vertex where p faces (and p edges) come together.

  - **Xie**:
    dual map can not reduce dimension.

- **Xie**:
  different partition of the same surface have the same topology,

  but different partition of the same surface
  have different 2 dimensional algebraic structure,

  and different ways of identify parts of the partitions
  give different 3 spaces.

## 1.5 "a voyage round the world"

- hamilton path

## 1.6 euler's formula

## 1.7 regular maps

- A map is said to be regular,
  of type {p, q},
  if there are p vertices and p edges for each face,
  q edges and q faces at each vertex.

  for example, {4, 4} on torus.

## 1.8 configurations

- **Xie**:
  a notation to record regularity of complex.
  in a 2-complex, to allow more then two faces passing one line,
  is like allowing more then two points lying on one line?
  this is what the notation is suggesting.

## 1.9 historical remarks

- Schlafli symbol

# ii. regular and quasi-regular solids

## regular polyhedra

- [bib] sommerville

  1. Division of space by congruent triangles and tetrahedra.
     Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 43 (1923), pp.85-116.
  2. The regular divisions of space of n dimensions and their metrical constants.
     Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo, 48(1924), pp. 9-22.
  3. An Introduction to the Geometry of η Dimensions. London,1929.

- **Xie**:
  vertex figure is just like the combinatorial neighborhood at a vertex.
  note that there is a dimension-down here,
  the vertex figure at a vertex of a polygon is a segment.
  the vertex figure at a vertex of a polyhedron is a polygon.

- a polyhedron is regular
  if its faces and vertex figures are all regular.

  regular polyhedron {p, q}
  Its face is a {p},
  and its vertex figure is a {q}.

## reciprocation

- reciprocation also is the topology dual.

## quasi-regular polyhedra

## radii and angles

## descartes' formula

## petrie polygons

## the rhombic dodecahedron and triacontahedron

## zonohedra

## historical remarks

# iii. rotation groups

## congruent transformations

- congruent transformations
  can be derived from three " primitive " transformations :
  1. translation [rigid motion]
  2. rotation [rigid motion]
  3. reflection [reverse orientation]

## transformations in general

- **Xie**:
  這一節有對 group theory 中 "Τ transformed by S" 的幾何解釋

## groups

- [bib] Levi
  Levi 1. Algebra. Vol. 1. Calcutta, 1942.

## symmetry operations

- a symmetry of a figure is a congruent transformation
  which leaves it unchanged as a whole,
  merely permuting its component elements.

- Every finite group of congruent transformations
  leaves atleast one point [the centroid] invariant.

  thus, the transforms of any point by such a group lie on a sphere.

## the polyhedral groups

## the five regular compounds

## coordinates for the vertices of the regular and quasi-regular solids

## the complete enumeration of finite rotation groups

## historical remarks

# iv. tessellations and honeycombs

## 4.1 the three regular tessellations

## 4.2 the quasi-regular and rhombic tessellations

## 4.3 rotation groups in two dimensions

## 4.4 coordinates for the vertices

## 4.5 lines of symmetry

## 4.6 space filled with cubes

## 4.7 other honeycombs

## 4.8 proportional numbers of elements

## 4.9 historical remarks

# v. the kaleidoscope

## 5.1 reflections in one or two planes, or lines, or points

## 5.2 reflections in three or four lines

## 5.3 the fundamental region and generating relations

## 5.4 reflections in three concurrent planes

## 5.5 reflections in four, five, or six planes

## 5.6 representation by graphs

## 5.7 wythoff's construction

## 5.8 pappus's observation concerning reciprocal regular polyhedra

## 5.9 the petrie polygon and central symmetry

## 5.x historical remarks
