---
title: The Order of Nature
author: Charles Sanders Peirce
year: 1878
---

# I

Any proposition whatever concerning the order of Nature must touch
more or less upon religion. In our day, belief, even in these matters,
depends more and more upon the observation of facts. If a remarkable
and universal orderliness be found in the universe, there must be some
cause for this regularity, and science has to consider what hypotheses
might account for the phenomenon. One way of accounting for it,
certainly, would be to suppose that the world is ordered by a superior
power. But if there is nothing in the universal subjection of
phenomena to laws, nor in the character of those laws themselves (as
being benevolent, beautiful, economical, etc.), which goes to prove
the existence of a governor of the universe, it is hardly to be
anticipated that any other sort of evidence will be found to weigh
very much with minds emancipated from the tyranny of tradition.

Nevertheless, it cannot truly be said that even an absolutely negative
decision of that question could altogether destroy religion, inasmuch
as there are faiths in which, however much they differ from our own,
we recognize those essential characters which make them worthy to be
called religions, and which, nevertheless, do not postulate an
actually existing Deity. That one, for instance, which has had the
most numerous and by no means the least intelligent following of any
on earth, teaches that the Divinity in his highest perfection is
wrapped away from the world in a state of profound and eternal sleep,
which really does not differ from non-existence, whether it be called
by that name or not. No candid mind who has followed the writings of
M. Vacherot can well deny that his religion is as earnest as can
be. He worships the Perfect, the Supreme Ideal; but he conceives that
the very notion of the Ideal is repugnant to its real existence.[45]
In fact, M. Vacherot finds it agreeable to his reason to assert that
non-existence is an essential character of the perfect, just as
St. Anselm and Descartes found it agreeable to theirs to assert the
extreme opposite. I confess that there is one respect in which either
of these positions seems to me more congruous with the religious
attitude than that of a theology which stands upon evidences; for as
soon as the Deity presents himself to either Anselm or Vacherot, and
manifests his glorious attributes, whether it be in a vision of the
night or day, either of them recognizes his adorable God, and sinks
upon his knees at once; whereas the theologian of evidences will first
demand that the divine apparition shall identify himself, and only
after having scrutinized his credentials and weighed the probabilities
of his being found among the totality of existences, will he finally
render his circumspect homage, thinking that no characters can be
adorable but those which belong to a real thing.

If we could find out any general characteristic of the universe, any
mannerism in the ways of Nature, any law everywhere applicable and
universally valid, such a discovery would be of such singular
assistance to us in all our future reasoning, that it would deserve a
place almost at the head of the principles of logic. On the other
hand, if it can be shown that there is nothing of the sort to find
out, but that every discoverable regularity is of limited range, this
again will be of logical importance. What sort of a conception we
ought to have of the universe, how to think of the _ensemble_ of
things, is a fundamental problem in the theory of reasoning.

# II

It is the legitimate endeavor of scientific men now, as it was
twenty-three hundred years ago, to account for the formation of the
solar system and of the cluster of stars which forms the galaxy, by
the fortuitous concourse of atoms. The greatest expounder of this
theory, when asked how he could write an immense book on the system of
the world without one mention of its author, replied, very logically,
“Je n’avais pas besoin de cette hypothèse-là.” But, in truth,
there is nothing atheistical in the theory, any more than there was in
this answer.  Matter is supposed to be composed of molecules which
obey the laws of mechanics and exert certain attractions upon one
another; and it is to these regularities (which there is no attempt to
account for) that general arrangement of the solar system would be
due, and not to hazard.

If any one has ever maintained that the universe is a pure throw of
the dice, the theologians have abundantly refuted him. “How often,”
says Archbishop Tillotson, “might a man, after he had jumbled a set
of letters in a bag, fling them out upon the ground before they would
fall into an exact poem, yea, or so much as make a good discourse in
prose!  And may not a little book be as easily made by chance as this
great volume of the world?” The chance world here shown to be so
different from that in which we live would be one in which there were
no laws, the characters of different things being entirely
independent; so that, should a sample of any kind of objects ever show
a prevalent character, it could only be by accident, and no general
proposition could ever be established. Whatever further conclusions we
may come to in regard to the order of the universe, thus much may be
regarded as solidly established, that the world is not a mere
chance-medley.

But whether the world makes an exact poem or not, is another question.
When we look up at the heavens at night, we readily perceive that the
stars are not simply splashed on to the celestial vault; but there
does not seem to be any precise system in their arrangement either. It
will be worth our while, then, to inquire into the degree of
orderliness in the universe; and, to begin, let us ask whether the
world we live in is any more orderly than a purely chance-world would
be.

Any uniformity, or law of Nature, may be stated in the form, “Every A
is B”; as, every ray of light is a non-curved line, every body is
accelerated toward the earth’s center, etc. This is the same as to
say, “There does not exist any A which is not B”; there is no curved
ray; there is no body not accelerated toward the earth; so that the
uniformity consists in the non-occurrence in Nature of a certain
combination of characters (in this case, the combination of being A
with being non-B).[46] And, conversely, every case of the
non-occurrence of a combination of characters would constitute a
uniformity in Nature. Thus, suppose the quality A is never found in
combination with the quality C: for example, suppose the quality of
idiocy is never found in combination with that of having a
well-developed brain. Then nothing of the sort A is of the sort C, or
everything of the sort A is of the sort non-C (or say, every idiot has
an ill-developed brain), which, being something universally true of
the A’s, is a uniformity in the world. Thus we see that, in a world
where there were no uniformities, no logically possible combination of
characters would be excluded, but every combination would exist in
some object. But two objects not identical must differ in some of
their characters, though it be only in the character of being in
such-and-such a place. Hence, precisely the same combination of
characters could not be found in two different objects; and,
consequently, in a chance-world every combination involving either the
positive or negative of every character would belong to just one
thing.  Thus, if there were but five simple characters in such a
world,[47] we might denote them by A, B, C, D, E, and their negatives
by a, b, c, d, e; and then, as there would be 2^5 or 32 different
combinations of these characters, completely determinate in reference
to each of them, that world would have just 32 objects in it, their
characters being as in the following table:

TABLE I.

    ABCDE   AbCDE   aBCDE   abCDE
    ABCDe   AbCDe   aBCDe   abCDe
    ABCdE   AbCdE   aBCdE   abCdE
    ABCde   AbCde   aBCde   abCde
    ABcDE   AbcDE   aBcDE   abcDE
    ABcDe   AbcDe   aBcDe   abcDe
    ABcdE   AbcdE   aBcdE   abcdE
    ABcde   Abcde   aBcde   abcde

For example, if the five primary characters were _hard_, _sweet_,
_fragrant_, _green_, _bright_, there would be one object which
reunited all these qualities, one which was hard, sweet, fragrant, and
green, but not bright; one which was hard, sweet, fragrant, and
bright, but not green; one which was hard, sweet, and fragrant, but
neither green nor bright; and so on through all the combinations.

This is what a thoroughly chance-world would be like, and certainly
nothing could be imagined more systematic. When a quantity of letters
are poured out of a bag, the appearance of disorder is due to the
circumstance that the phenomena are only partly fortuitous. The laws
of space are supposed, in that case, to be rigidly preserved, and
there is also a certain amount of regularity in the formation of the
letters. The result is that some elements are orderly and some are
disorderly, which is precisely what we observe in the actual
world. Tillotson, in the passage of which a part has been quoted, goes
on to ask, “How long might 20,000 blind men which should be sent out
from the several remote parts of England, wander up and down before
they would all meet upon Salisbury Plains, and fall into rank and file
in the exact order of an army? And yet this is much more easy to be
imagined than how the innumerable blind parts of matter should
rendezvous themselves into a world.” This is very true, but in the
actual world the _blind men_ are, as far as we can see, _not_ drawn up
in any particular order at all. And, in short, while a certain amount
of order exists in the world, it would seem that the world is not so
orderly as it might be, and, for instance, not so much so as a world
of pure chance would be.

But we can never get to the bottom of this question until we take
account of a highly-important logical principle[48] which I now
proceed to enounce. This principle is that any plurality or lot of
objects whatever have some character in common (no matter how
insignificant) which is peculiar to them and not shared by anything
else. The word “character” here is taken in such a sense as to
include negative characters, such as incivility, inequality, etc., as
well as their positives, civility, equality, etc. To prove the
theorem, I will show what character any two things, A and B, have in
common, not shared by anything else. The things, A and B, are each
distinguished from all other things by the possession of certain
characters which may be named A-ness and B-ness. Corresponding to
these positive characters, are the negative characters un-A-ness,
which is possessed by everything except A, and un-B-ness, which is
possessed by everything except B. These two characters are united in
everything except A and B; and this union of the characters un-A-ness
and un-B-ness makes a compound character which may be termed
A-B-lessness. This is not possessed by either A or B, but it is
possessed by everything else. This character, like every other, has
its corresponding negative un-A-B-lessness, and this last is the
character possessed by both A and B, and by nothing else. It is
obvious that what has thus been shown true of two things is _mutatis
mutandis_, true of any number of things. Q. E. D.

In any world whatever, then, there must be a character peculiar to
each possible group of objects. If, as a matter of nomenclature,
characters peculiar to the same group be regarded as only different
aspects of the same character, then we may say that there will be
precisely one character for each possible group of objects. Thus,
suppose a world to contain five things, α, β, γ, δ, ε. Then it
will have a separate character for each of the 31 groups (with
_non-existence_ making up 32 or 2^5) shown in the following table:

TABLE II.

         αβ    αβγ    αβγδ    αβγδε
    α    αγ    αβδ    αβγε
    β    αδ    αβε    αβδε
    γ    αε    αγδ    αγδε
    δ    βγ    αγε    βγδε
    ε    βδ    αδε
         βε    βγδ
         γδ    βγε
         γε    βδε
         δε    γδε

This shows that a contradiction is involved in the very idea[49] of a
chance-world, for in a world of 32 things, instead of there being only
3^5 or 243 characters, as we have seen that the notion of a
chance-world requires, there would, in fact, be no less than 2^{32},
or 4,294,967,296 characters, which would not be all independent, but
would have all possible relations with one another.

We further see that so long as we regard characters abstractly,
without regard to their relative importance, etc., there is no
possibility of a more or less degree of orderliness in the world, the
whole system of relationship between the different characters being
given by mere logic; that is, being implied in those facts which are
tacitly admitted as soon as we admit that there is any such thing as
reasoning.

In order to descend from this abstract point of view, it is requisite
to consider the characters of things as relative to the perceptions
and active powers of living beings. Instead, then, of attempting to
imagine a world in which there should be no uniformities, let us
suppose one in which none of the uniformities should have reference to
characters interesting or important to us. In the first place, there
would be nothing to puzzle us in such a world. The small number of
qualities which would directly meet the senses would be the ones which
would afford the key to everything which could possibly interest
us. The whole universe would have such an air of system and perfect
regularity that there would be nothing to ask. In the next place, no
action of ours, and no event of Nature, would have important
consequences in such a world.  We should be perfectly free from all
responsibility, and there would be nothing to do but to enjoy or
suffer whatever happened to come along.  Thus there would be nothing
to stimulate or develop either the mind or the will, and we
consequently should neither act nor think. We should have no memory,
because that depends on a law of our organization. Even if we had any
senses, we should be situated toward such a world precisely as
inanimate objects are toward the present one, provided we suppose that
these objects have an absolutely transitory and instantaneous
consciousness without memory—a supposition which is a mere mode of
speech, for that would be no consciousness at all. We may, therefore,
say that a world of chance is simply our actual world viewed from the
standpoint of an animal at the very vanishing-point of
intelligence. The actual world is almost a chance-medley to the mind
of a polyp. The interest which the uniformities of Nature have for an
animal measures his place in the scale of intelligence.

Thus, nothing can be made out from the orderliness of Nature in regard
to the existence of a God, unless it be maintained that the existence
of a finite mind proves the existence of an infinite one.

# III

In the last of these papers we examined the nature of inductive or
synthetic reasoning. We found it to be a process of sampling. A number
of specimens of a class are taken, not by selection within that class,
but at random. These specimens will agree in a great number of
respects.  If, now, it were likely that a second lot would agree with
the first in the majority of these respects, we might base on this
consideration an inference in regard to any one of these
characters. But such an inference would neither be of the nature of
induction, nor would it (except in special cases) be valid, because
the vast majority of points of agreement in the first sample drawn
would generally be entirely accidental, as well as insignificant. To
illustrate this, I take the ages at death of the first five poets
given in Wheeler’s _Biographical Dictionary_. They are:

                               Aagard, 48.
                               Abeille, 70.
                               Abulola, 84.
                               Abunowas, 48.
                               Accords, 45.

These five ages have the following characters in common:

1. The difference of the two digits composing the number, divided by
   three, leaves a remainder of _one_.

2. The first digit raised to the power indicated by the second, and
   divided by three, leaves a remainder of _one_.

3. The sum of the prime factors of each age, including one, is
   divisible by three.

It is easy to see that the number of accidental agreements of this
sort would be quite endless. But suppose that, instead of considering
a character because of its prevalence in the sample, we designate a
character before taking the sample, selecting it for its importance,
obviousness, or other point of interest. Then two considerable samples
drawn at random are extremely likely to agree approximately in regard
to the proportion of occurrences of a character so chosen. _The
inference that a previously designated character has nearly the same
frequency of occurrence in the whole of a class that it has in a
sample drawn at random out of that class is induction._ If the
character be not previously designated, then a sample in which it is
found to be prevalent can only serve to suggest that it _may be_
prevalent in the whole class. We may consider this surmise as an
inference if we please—an inference of possibility; but a second
sample must be drawn to test the question of whether the character
actually is prevalent.  Instead of designating beforehand a single
character in reference to which we will examine a sample, we may
designate two, and use the same sample to determine the relative
frequencies of both. This will be making two inductive inferences at
once; and, of course, we are less certain that both will yield correct
conclusions than we should be that either separately would do so. What
is true of two characters is true of any limited number. Now, the
number of characters which have any considerable interest for us in
reference to any class of objects is more moderate than might be
supposed. As we shall be sure to examine any sample with reference to
these characters, they may be regarded not exactly as predesignated,
but as predetermined (which amounts to the same thing); and we may
infer that the sample represents the class in all these respects if we
please, remembering only that this is not so secure an inference as if
the particular quality to be looked for had been fixed upon
beforehand.

The demonstration of this theory of induction rests upon principles
and follows methods which are accepted by all those who display in
other matters the particular knowledge and force of mind which qualify
them to judge of this. The theory itself, however, quite unaccountably
seems never to have occurred to any of the writers who have undertaken
to explain synthetic reasoning. The most widely-spread opinion in the
matter is one which was much promoted by Mr. John Stuart Mill—namely,
that induction depends for its validity upon the uniformity of
Nature—that is, on the principle that what happens once will, under a
sufficient degree of similarity of circumstances, happen again as
often as the same circumstances recur. The application is this: The
fact that different things belong to the same class constitutes the
similarity of circumstances, and the induction is good, provided this
similarity is “sufficient.” What happens once is, that a number of
these things are found to have a certain character; what may be
expected, then, to happen again as often as the circumstances recur
consists in this, that all things belonging to the same class should
have the same character.

This analysis of induction has, I venture to think, various
imperfections, to some of which it may be useful to call attention. In
the first place, when I put my hand in a bag and draw out a handful of
beans, and, finding three-quarters of them black, infer that about
three-quarters of all in the bag are black, my inference is obviously
of the same kind as if I had found any larger proportion, or the
whole, of the sample black, and had assumed that it represented in
that respect the rest of the contents of the bag. But the analysis in
question hardly seems adapted to the explanation of this
_proportionate_ induction, where the conclusion, instead of being that
a certain event uniformly happens under certain circumstances, is
precisely that it does not uniformly occur, but only happens in a
certain proportion of cases. It is true that the whole sample may be
regarded as a single object, and the inference may be brought under
the formula proposed by considering the conclusion to be that any
similar sample will show a similar proportion among its
constituents. But this is to treat the induction as if it rested on a
single instance, which gives a very false idea of its probability.

In the second place, if the uniformity of Nature were the sole warrant
of induction, we should have no right to draw one in regard to a
character whose constancy we knew nothing about. Accordingly, Mr. Mill
says that, though none but white swans were known to Europeans for
thousands of years, yet the inference that all swans were white was
“not a good induction,” because it was not known that color was a
usual generic character (it, in fact, not being so by any means). But
it is mathematically demonstrable that an inductive inference may have
as high a degree of probability as you please independent of any
antecedent knowledge of the constancy of the character
inferred. Before it was known that color is not usually a character of
_genera_, there was certainly a considerable probability that all
swans were white. But the further study of the _genera_ of animals led
to the induction of their non-uniformity in regard to color. A
deductive application of this general proposition would have gone far
to overcome the probability of the universal whiteness of swans before
the black species was discovered. When we do know anything in regard
to the general constancy or inconstancy of a character, the
application of that general knowledge to the particular class to which
any induction relates, though it serves to increase or diminish the
force of the induction, is, like every application of general
knowledge to particular cases, deductive in its nature and not
inductive.

In the third place, to say that inductions are true because similar
events happen in similar circumstances—or, what is the same thing,
because objects similar in some respects are likely to be similar in
others—is to overlook those conditions which really are essential to
the validity of inductions. When we take all the characters into
account, any pair of objects resemble one another in just as many
particulars as any other pair. If we limit ourselves to such
characters as have for us any importance, interest, or obviousness,
then a synthetic conclusion may be drawn, but only on condition that
the specimens by which we judge have been taken at random from the
class in regard to which we are to form a judgment, and not selected
as belonging to any sub-class. The induction only has its full force
when the character concerned has been designated before examining the
sample. These are the essentials of induction, and they are not
recognized in attributing the validity of induction to the uniformity
of Nature. The explanation of induction by the doctrine of
probabilities, given in the last of these papers, is not a mere
metaphysical formula, but is one from which all the rules of synthetic
reasoning can be deduced systematically and with mathematical
cogency. But the account of the matter by a principle of Nature, even
if it were in other respects satisfactory, presents the fatal
disadvantage of leaving us quite as much afloat as before in regard to
the proper method of induction. It does not surprise me, therefore,
that those who adopt this theory have given erroneous rules for the
conduct of reasoning, nor that the greater number of examples put
forward by Mr.  Mill in his first edition, as models of what
inductions should be, proved in the light of further scientific
progress so particularly unfortunate that they had to be replaced by
others in later editions.  One would have supposed that Mr. Mill might
have based an induction on _this_ circumstance, especially as it is
his avowed principle that, if the conclusion of an induction turns out
false, it cannot have been a good induction. Nevertheless, neither he
nor any of his scholars seem to have been led to suspect, in the
least, the perfect solidity of the framework which he devised for
securely supporting the mind in its passage from the known to the
unknown, although at its first trial it did not answer quite so well
as had been expected.

# IV

When we have drawn any statistical induction—such, for instance, as
that one-half of all births are of male children—it is always possible
to discover, by investigation sufficiently prolonged, a class of which
the same predicate may be affirmed universally; to find out, for
instance, _what sort of_ births are of male children. The truth of
this principle follows immediately from the theorem that there is a
character peculiar to every possible group of objects. The form in
which the principle is usually stated is, that _every event must have
a cause_.

But, though there exists a cause for every event, and that of a kind
which is capable of being discovered, yet if there be nothing to guide
us to the discovery; if we have to hunt among all the events in the
world without any scent; if, for instance, the sex of a child might
equally be supposed to depend on the configuration of the planets, on
what was going on at the antipodes, or on anything else—then the
discovery would have no chance of ever getting made.

That we ever do discover the precise causes of things, that any
induction whatever is absolutely without exception, is what we have no
right to assume. On the contrary, it is an easy corollary, from the
theorem just referred to, that every empirical rule has an
exception.[50] But there are certain of our inductions which present
an approach to universality so extraordinary that, even if we are to
suppose that they are not strictly universal truths, we cannot
possibly think that they have been reached merely by accident. The
most remarkable laws of this kind are those of _time_ and
_space_. With reference to space, Bishop Berkeley first showed, in a
very conclusive manner, that it was not a thing _seen_, but a thing
_inferred_. Berkeley chiefly insists on the impossibility of directly
seeing the third dimension of space, since the retina of the eye is a
surface. But, in point of fact, the retina is not even a surface; it
is a conglomeration of nerve-needles directed toward the light and
having only their extreme points sensitive, these points lying at
considerable distances from one another compared with their
areas. Now, of these points, certainly the excitation of no one singly
can produce the perception of a surface, and consequently not the
aggregate of all the sensations can amount to this.  But certain
relations subsist between the excitations of different nerve-points,
and these constitute the premises upon which the hypothesis of space
is founded, and from which it is inferred. That space is not
immediately perceived is now universally admitted; and a mediate
cognition is what is called an inference, and is subject to the
criticism of logic. But what are we to say to the fact of every
chicken as soon as it is hatched solving a problem whose data are of a
complexity sufficient to try the greatest mathematical powers? It
would be insane to deny that the tendency to light upon the conception
of space is inborn in the mind of the chicken and of every animal. The
same thing is equally true of time. That time is not directly
perceived is evident, since no lapse of time is present, and we only
perceive what is present. That, not having the idea of time, we should
never be able to perceive the flow in our sensations without some
particular aptitude for it, will probably also be admitted. The idea
of force—at least, in its rudiments—is another conception so early
arrived at, and found in animals so low in the scale of intelligence,
that it must be supposed innate. But the innateness of an idea admits
of degree, for it consists in the tendency of that idea to present
itself to the mind. Some ideas, like that of space, do so present
themselves irresistibly at the very dawn of intelligence, and take
possession of the mind on small provocation, while of other
conceptions we are prepossessed, indeed, but not so strongly, down a
scale which is greatly extended. The tendency to personify every
thing, and to attribute human characters to it, may be said to be
innate; but it is a tendency which is very soon overcome by civilized
man in regard to the greater part of the objects about him.  Take such
a conception as that of gravitation varying inversely as the square of
the distance. It is a very simple law. But to say that it is simple is
merely to say that it is one which the mind is particularly adapted to
apprehend with facility. Suppose the idea of a quantity multiplied
into another had been no more easy to the mind than that of a quantity
raised to the power indicated by itself—should we ever have discovered
the law of the solar system?

It seems incontestable, therefore, that the mind of man is strongly
adapted to the comprehension of the world; at least, so far as this
goes, that certain conceptions, highly important for such a
comprehension, naturally arise in his mind; and, without such a
tendency, the mind could never have had any development at all.

How are we to explain this adaptation? The great utility and
indispensableness of the conceptions of time, space, and force, even
to the lowest intelligence, are such as to suggest that they are the
results of natural selection. Without something like geometrical,
kinetical, and mechanical conceptions, no animal could seize his food
or do anything which might be necessary for the preservation of the
species. He might, it is true, be provided with an instinct which
would generally have the same effect; that is to say, he might have
conceptions different from those of time, space, and force, but which
coincided with them in regard to the ordinary cases of the animal’s
experience. But, as that animal would have an immense advantage in the
struggle for life whose mechanical conceptions did not break down in a
novel situation (such as development must bring about), there would be
a constant selection in favor of more and more correct ideas of these
matters. Thus would be attained the knowledge of that fundamental law
upon which all science rolls; namely, that forces depend upon
relations of time, space, and mass. When this idea was once
sufficiently clear, it would require no more than a comprehensible
degree of genius to discover the exact nature of these relations. Such
an hypothesis naturally suggests itself, but it must be admitted that
it does not seem sufficient to account for the extraordinary accuracy
with which these conceptions apply to the phenomena of Nature, and it
is probable that there is some secret here which remains to be
discovered.

# V

Some important questions of logic depend upon whether we are to
consider the material universe as of limited extent and finite age, or
quite boundless in space and in time. In the former case, it is
conceivable that a general plan or design embracing the whole universe
should be discovered, and it would be proper to be on the alert for
some traces of such a unity. In the latter case, since the proportion
of the world of which we can have any experience is less than the
smallest assignable fraction, it follows that we never could discover
any _pattern_ in the universe except a repeating one; any design
embracing the whole would be beyond our powers to discern, and beyond
the united powers of all intellects during all time. Now, what is
absolutely incapable of being known is, as we have seen in a former
paper, not real at all. An absolutely incognizable existence is a
nonsensical phrase. If, therefore, the universe is infinite, the
attempt to find in it any design embracing it as a whole is futile,
and involves a false way of looking at the subject. If the universe
never had any beginning, and if in space world stretches beyond world
without limit, there is no _whole_ of material things, and
consequently no general character to the universe, and no need or
possibility of any governor for it. But if there was a time before
which absolutely no matter existed, if there are certain absolute
bounds to the region of things outside of which there is a mere void,
then we naturally seek for an explanation of it, and, since we cannot
look for it among material things, the hypothesis of a great
disembodied animal, the creator and governor of the world, is natural
enough.

The actual state of the evidence as to the limitation of the universe
is as follows: As to time, we find on our earth a constant progress of
development since the planet was a red-hot ball; the solar system
seems to have resulted from the condensation of a nebula, and the
process appears to be still going on. We sometimes see stars
(presumably with systems of worlds) destroyed and apparently resolved
back into the nebulous condition, but we have no evidence of any
existence of the world previous to the nebulous stage from which it
seems to have been evolved. All this rather favors the idea of a
beginning than otherwise.  As for limits in space, we cannot be sure
that we see anything outside of the system of the Milky Way. Minds of
theological predilections have therefore no need of distorting the
facts to reconcile them with their views.

But the only scientific presumption is, that the unknown parts of
space and time are like the known parts, occupied; that, as we see
cycles of life and death in all development which we can trace out to
the end, the same holds good in regard to solar systems; that as
enormous distances lie between the different planets of our solar
system, relatively to their diameters, and as still more enormous
distances lie between our system relatively to its diameter and other
systems, so it may be supposed that other galactic clusters exist so
remote from ours as not to be recognized as such with certainty. I do
not say that these are strong inductions; I only say that they are the
presumptions which, in our ignorance of the facts, should be preferred
to hypotheses which involve conceptions of things and occurrences
totally different in their character from any of which we have had any
experience, such as disembodied spirits, the creation of matter,
infringements of the laws of mechanics, etc.

The universe ought to be presumed too vast to have any character. When
it is claimed that the arrangements of Nature are benevolent, or just,
or wise, or of any other peculiar kind, we ought to be prejudiced
against such opinions, as being the offspring of an ill-founded notion
of the finitude of the world. And examination has hitherto shown that
such beneficences, justice, etc., are of a most limited kind—limited
in degree and limited in range.

In like manner, if any one claims to have discovered a plan in the
structure of organized beings, or a scheme in their classification, or
a regular arrangement among natural objects, or a system of
proportionality in the human form, or an order of development, or a
correspondence between conjunctions of the planets and human events,
or a significance in numbers, or a key to dreams, the first thing we
have to ask is whether such relations are susceptible of explanation
on mechanical principles, and if not they should be looked upon with
disfavor as having already a strong presumption against them; and
examination has generally exploded all such theories.

There are minds to whom every prejudice, every presumption, seems
unfair. It is easy to say what minds these are. They are those who
never have known what it is to draw a well-grounded induction, and who
imagine that other people’s knowledge is as nebulous as their
own. That all science rolls upon presumption (not of a formal but of a
real kind) is no argument with them, because they cannot imagine that
there is anything solid in human knowledge. These are the people who
waste their time and money upon perpetual motions and other such
rubbish.

But there are better minds who take up mystical theories (by which I
mean all those which have no possibility of being mechanically
explained). These are persons who are strongly prejudiced in favor of
such theories. We all have natural tendencies to believe in such
things; our education often strengthens this tendency; and the result
is, that to many minds nothing seems so antecedently probable as a
theory of this kind. Such persons find evidence enough in favor of
their views, and in the absence of any recognized logic of induction
they cannot be driven from their belief.

But to the mind of a physicist there ought to be a strong presumption
against every mystical theory; and, therefore, it seems to me that
those scientific men who have sought to make out that science was not
hostile to theology have not been so clear-sighted as their opponents.

It would be extravagant to say that science can at present disprove
religion; but it does seem to me that the spirit of science is hostile
to any religion except such a one as that of M. Vacherot. Our
appointed teachers inform us that Buddhism is a miserable and
atheistical faith, shorn of the most glorious and needful attributes
of a religion; that its priests can be of no use to agriculture by
praying for rain, nor to war by commanding the sun to stand still. We
also hear the remonstrances of those who warn us that to shake the
general belief in the living God would be to shake the general morals,
public and private. This, too, must be admitted; such a revolution of
thought could no more be accomplished without waste and desolation
than a plantation of trees could be transferred to new ground, however
wholesome in itself, without all of them languishing for a time, and
many of them dying. Nor is it, by-the-way, a thing to be presumed that
a man would have taken part in a movement having a possible
atheistical issue without having taken serious and adequate counsel in
regard to that responsibility. But, let the consequences of such a
belief be as dire as they may, one thing is certain: that the state of
the facts, whatever it may be, will surely get found out, and no human
prudence can long arrest the triumphal car of truth—no, not if the
discovery were such as to drive every individual of our race to
suicide!

But it would be folly to suppose that any metaphysical theory in
regard to the mode of being of the perfect is to destroy that
aspiration toward the perfect which constitutes the essence of
religion. It is true that, if the priests of any particular form of
religion succeed in making it generally believed that religion cannot
exist without the acceptance of certain formulas, or if they succeed
in so interweaving certain dogmas with the popular religion that the
people can see no essential analogy between a religion which accepts
these points of faith and one which rejects them, the result may very
well be to render those who cannot believe these things
irreligious. Nor can we ever hope that any body of priests should
consider themselves more teachers of religion in general than of the
particular system of theology advocated by their own party.  But no
man need be excluded from participation in the common feelings, nor
from so much of the public expression of them as is open to all the
laity, by the unphilosophical narrowness of those who guard the
mysteries of worship. Am I to be prevented from joining in that common
joy at the revelation of enlightened principles of religion, which we
celebrate at Easter and Christmas, because I think that certain
scientific, logical, and metaphysical ideas which have been mixed up
with these principles are untenable? No; to do so would be to estimate
those errors as of more consequence than the truth—an opinion which
few would admit. People who do not believe what are really the
fundamental principles of Christianity are rare to find, and all but
these few ought to feel at home in the churches.

# Footnotes

- Footnote 44:

  _Popular Science Monthly_, June, 1878.

- Footnote 45:

  [See Santayana, _Reason in Religion_.]

- Footnote 46:

  For the present purpose, the negative of a character is to be
  considered as much a character as the positive, for a uniformity may
  either be affirmative or negative. I do not say that no distinction
  can be drawn between positive and negative uniformities.

- Footnote 47:

  There being 5 simple characters, with their negatives, they could be
  compounded in various ways so as to make 241 characters in all,
  without counting the characters _existence_ and _non-existence_,
  which make up 243 or 3^5.

- Footnote 48:

  This principle was, I believe, first stated by Mr. De Morgan.

- Footnote 49:

  Not in every idea but only in the one so formulated.

- Footnote 50:

  [Note that this corollary is itself a theoretical inference and not
  an empirical rule.]
