# An Exploration on the Purpose of Rules / 探寻教条的目的

- 人类教条行为分析

[ [TALK](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FhkI1FMheA) ]

教条（Rule）的类型：

- 禁忌（Taboo）

  - forbidden，cursed，unclean.
  - 没有普世的禁忌，这里禁止的，总有那里允许。

- 法律（Law）

  - 由社会机构强迫执行。

- 标准，规范（Norm）

  - Group held beliefs about how members should behave in a given context.
  - We use them to define group identity and to enforce social control.

问题不是我们为什么违反这些教条，
问题是为什么我会遵循教条，
毕竟不遵循其实也没事。

Social rule system theory, 8 reasons to explain why the obedience.

- Self Interest

  Follow a rule to gain a benefit, to avoid a loss.

- Identity Status

  Marking yourself as part of a group.

- Authority

  Group promote authorities, and then they respect the rules thoes authorities create.

- Order

  To maintain a sense of order.

  To make the world seem regular and dependable.

- Social Sanctions

  We'll put you in prison if you break the rules.

- Inherent Sanctions

  Sanctions are built-in.

- Ignorance

  The veil of ignorance.

  To follow a rule, even when you are harmed by doing so,
  because you cannot understand and see the consequence.

- Habit

  The most deeply accepted rules are often the least questioned.

5 rules (norms, constraints) about programming:

- 100 lines per class
- 5 lines per method
- 4 parameters per method (maybe only 3 parameters)
- 1 instance variable per view (set one instance variable on a controller action)
- 2 class names per controller action (a controller action may know only about two class names)
- You can break any rule that you can talk to your pair into agree is a good idea.

Results of the 5 rules:

- Bias towards small objects.
- Bias towards plain objects.
- Bias away from dependencies.

The rules force you to create small objects of your own
that know a minimal number of things,
and because of that objects end up with few dependencies.

The rules create changeable apps that are built with small objects
that require little context and have few dependencies.

So you end up with simple straightforward well tested code
that can be reused in novel an unexpected ways.
