# Intuitionistic Type Theory

------
- Author: Martin-Löf
- Date: 1984
------

# introductory remarks

# propositions and judgements

# explanations of the forms of judgement

## A : Set

## A = B : Set

## a : A

## a = b : A

# propositions

  - Classically, a proposition is nothing but a truth value,
    that is, an element of the set of truth values,
    whose two elements are the true and the false.

  - Because of the difficulties of justifying the rules
    for forming propositions
    by means of quantification over infinite domains,
    when a proposition is understood as a truth value,
    this explanation is rejected by the intuitionists
    and replaced by saying that,

    - a proposition is defined
      by laying down what counts as a proof of the proposition,

    - and that, a proposition is true if it has a proof,
      that is, if a proof of it can be given.

# rules of equality

# hypothetical judgements and substitution rules

## B : (-> :x : A -- Set)

## (-> :x : A -- :x B = :x D)

## (-> :x : A -- :x b : :x B)

## (-> :x : A -- :x b = :x d)

# judgements with more than one assumption and contexts

# sets and categories

  - A category is defined by explaining
    what an object of the category is
    and when two such objects are equal.

  - A category need not be a set,
    since we can grasp what it means
    to be an object of a given category
    even without exhaustive rules for forming its objects.

  - examples :
    #+begin_src jojo
    Set
    A
    (-> :x : A -- Set)
    (-> :x : A -- :x B)
    (# :x : A, :y : :x B)
    (-> :x : A, :y : :x B -- :x :y C)
    #+end_src

  - We will say 'object' of a category
    but 'element' of a set,
    which reflects the difference between categories and sets.

  - To define a category
    it is not necessary to prescribe
    how its objects are formed,
    but just to grasp what an (arbitrary) object
    of the category is.

  - Each set determines a category,
    namely the category of elements of the set,
    but not conversely :

    - for instance,
      the category of sets
      and the category of propositions are not sets,
      since we cannot describe
      how all their elements are formed.

  - We can now say that
    a judgement is a statement to the effect that
    something is an object of a category,
    or that two objects of a category are equal.

  - x -
    the author said (-> :x : A -- :x B)
    is a not set but a category,
    and (-> A -- B) is a set.

    which is not consistent.

    it would be better to only view
    inductively defined type as set.

# general remarks on the rules

  - We now start to give the rules
    for the different symbols we use.
    We will follow a common pattern in giving them.
    For each operation we have four rules :
    1. set formation
    2. introduction
    3. elimination
    4. equality

  - The formation rule says that
    we can form a certain set (proposition)
    from certain other sets (propositions)
    or families of sets (propositional functions).

  - The introduction rules say
    what are the canonical elements
    (and equal canonical elements) of the set,
    thus giving its meaning.

  - The elimination rule shows
    how we may define functions
    on the set defined by the introduction rules.

  - The equality rules
    relate the introduction and elimination rules
    by showing how a function defined
    by means of the elimination rule
    operates on the canonical elements of the set
    which are generated by the introduction rules.

# cartesian product of a family of sets

  #+begin_src jojo
  (-> :x : A -- :x B)
  #+end_src

# definitional equality

  - type alias

# applications of the cartesian product

# disjoint union of a family of sets

# applications of the disjointunion

# the axiom of choice

  #+begin_src jojo
  (+proof axiom-of-choice
    (-> :h : (-> :x : A -- :y : :x B, :x :y C)
     -- :f : (-> :x : A -- :x B)
        (-> :x : A -- :x :x :f C))
    {:h drop}
    {:h swap drop})

  (+proof axiom-of-choice
    (-> :h : (-> :x : A -- :y : :x B, :x :y C)
     -- :f : (-> :x0 : A -- :x0 B)
        (-> :x1 : A -- :x1 :x1 :f C))
    {:h drop}
    {:h swap drop})
  #+end_src

# the notion of such that

# disjoint union of two sets

# propositional equality

  - I(A,a,b) is an internal form of =.

  - x -
    one equality is the unification
    used in the implementation of the type system,
    while another equality is the unification
    exposed to the language been implemented.

# finite sets

# consistency

# natural numbers

# lists

# well orderings

# universes
