---
title: The Logic Notebook
author: Charles Sanders Peirce
date: 1867
---

# 1867-03-23

I cannot explain the deep emotion with which I open this book
again. Here I write but never after read what I have written for what
I write is done in the process of forming a conception. Yet I cannot
forget that here are the germs of the theory of the categories which
is (if anything is) the gift I make to the world. That is my child. In
it I shall live when oblivion has me -- my body.

This matter of the logical principles of the different kinds of
inference is a difficult matter. One way of putting it would be this.

Every symbol denotes certain objects and connotes certain characters.
The symbol represents each of those objects to have each of those
characters. The symbol may be a false one; it may be that the objects
it denotes do not have the characters it connotes. But if `S` is `M`
in this sense -- not merely that `M` is a name for `S` but that it is
the name of a class of things among which `S` is and if `M` is `P` not
merely in the sense that --

    then S is P.

Here the principle is that

    That which is M is what M is.

- **Xie:**

  Think about the duality between object and attribute in [formal
  concept
  analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_concept_analysis).

  In Peirce's terminology "character" is attribute (in programming we
  also use the word "property" for attribute).

  If we use `:` for "belong" and `<:` for subset, and have the
  following two meanings of "is":

  - `S` is `M` -- `S : M`
  - `M` is `P` -- `M <: P`

  Then the following rule can explain Peirce's principle:

  > That which is M is what M is.

  ```
  S : M
  M <: P
  -------
  S : P
  ```

  > That which [belongs to] M [also belongs to] what M [is as subset of].

  This double meaning of "is" first occurs in Aristotle's books.

  TODO Write detailed comparison of Aristotle's "is".

  TODO Can we understand Aristotle's categories as different contexts
  under which the meaning of "is" is different?

Every one of the integrant parts of `m` is an integrant part of each
prime aliquot [factor] of `m` and vice versa.

A purely contentless principle. As a logical principle should be.

Now let us take up the synthetic arguments.

Whatever is a character of every thing denoted by `M` is a character
of `M`.  Whatever has every character of `M` is denoted by `m`.

- **Xie:** Suppose we have a set of objects denoted by `M`,
  we can first observe these objects' common attributes,
  then define `M` again by these common attributes.

  After then, we can use the later definition of `M`
  to determine whether a new object as every attributes,
  and write `m : M`.

Here are two principles. But they do not apply to induction and
hypothesis just as they stand.

- **Xie:** The terminology "induction" and "hypothesis" refer to
  Peirce's deduction v.s. induction v.s. hypothesis.

  If we can understand Aristotle's categories as different contexts of "is",
  then we can also understand Peirce's categories (see the first paragraph of this note)
  as different contexts of reasoning.

Whatever is a common character of many things denoted by M is likely
to be a character of `m`.

- **Xie:** Here, "common character of many things" means
  the summarise of common attributes might be not complete.

That does not quite hit the point. It does not contain the idea that
the things must have been taken at random out of those denoted by `M`.

- **Xie:** If we select "many things" in random,
  the summarised "common attributes" will be more representivity.

- **Xie:** Merely distinguishing two meaning of "is",
  and understand the duality of object v.s. attribute,
  is not enough to express the reasoning we used in scientific method.

In what point of view shall we regard this necessity for a random
selection?

Suppose we look at the matter thus. Certain things have a certain
character in common. It follows that there _must_ be some genus of
these things which have the character. We cannot take any genus
_lower_ than that which they are selected as belonging to. To take a
higher one would involve a perfectly arbitrary proposition.

- **Xie:** "lower" means more specific, "higher" means more general.

- **Xie:**

  > Etymology of "genus":
  >
  > Borrowed from Latin genus ("birth, origin, a race, sort, kind")
  > from the root gen- in Latin gignere,
  > Old Latin gegnere ("to beget, produce").

  Think about DNA.

  Think about Chomsky's generative grammar,
  where sentences of a language is generated by some production rules,
  we do not know the rules in advance,
  we can only observe the sentences and guess the rules.

I am convinced that this is a very awkward way of taking hold of the
matter.

Suppose we take it up another way.

For any subject or predicate we can substitute what?

Only that which this subject or predicate represents -- only that
which fulfils the function of that subject or predicate -- only that
which the subject or predicate represents _to the proposition_ or to
the other terms of it.

Now a subject is a direct symbol of _its_ subject to its predicate and
a predicate of its predicate to its subject.

But a subject is also an imperfect representation of that genus from
which it has been taken -- by which it is determined. It is not a
_semeion_ sign of it as I have said -- it is an example of it.

A predicate is a representation of the thing of which it is a random
character -- a copy of it.

This is horribly vague.

# 1867-03-25

Here is another point of view.

What is the function of a symbol as subject? To stand for certain
things. Then if a predicate be true of all the things that it stands
for as yet, that is for all which we yet know it to stand for, the
symbol may stand as subject provisionally.

The difficulty with this is that it does not represent the synthetic
probability of the inference.

It is however a good idea that a random selection is equivalent to all
known -- the genus of those two would fit that.

We have

M is P in the sense that the actual denotation or things taken under M
are P (contingent)

and 2nd in the sense that all possible things taken under M would be P
(necessary).

On the same principle

S is M in the senses

    1st that S has the qualities taken of M (attributive)
    2nd that S has all qualities of M (subsumptive)

Still it may be doubted if Hypothesis proceeds by random selection of
qualities of the new predicate.

Then the principle would be

    the possible is like most of the actual.  # 1867-04-01 #
1867-04-12 # 1867-04-24 # 1867-09-26 # 1867-09-27 # 1867-09-28 #
1867-09-28 # 1867-10-02 # 1867-11-24 # 1867-12-07
