---
title: Learning How to Read
author: Niklas Luhmann
translator: Manfred Kuehn
source: https://luhmann.surge.sh/learning-how-to-read
---

Modern Society produces many very different kinds of texts, which
require very different kinds of reading. In some sense, the reading of
one kind of text spoils the reader for reading of other kinds of
text. Since this has to do with mostly unconscious and habitual
routines, such specializations are difficult to correct.

It is advisable to differentiate between poetic, narrative, and
theoretical (wissenschaftliche) texts. In what follows I will talk
mainly about theoretical texts, but their characteristic features are
best explicated by clarifying first why and how they must be read
differently from poems and novels.

The existence of an independent type of fictional texts is the result
of a long historical process of habituation, which lasted from the
seventeenth until the late eighteenth century. It was characterized by
the difficulty of differentiating between real reality and fictional
reality. (Novels first present themselves as letters or notes that
have been found, in order to convince the reader of their
authenticity.) In narrative texts, the unity of the text is the result
of a tension; it results from ignorance of the future which the reader
is constantly [made] aware of; but it is also the result of a backward
movement since, as Jean Paul noted, the resolution of the tension
depends on the fact that the reader must be able to recur to parts of
the text he has already read. The reader is confronted, as it were,
with the paradox of knowing what he does not yet know. The story
develops not only in the temporal dimension of its actions, it is also
qua text structured by time insofar as it operates on the distinction
“already read” versus “not yet read.”

The reading of poems involves completely different demands. Poems do
not in any way offer stories in the form of verses and therefore
cannot be read line by line in linear fashion from beginning to
end. With them, tonal elements, unusual word choices (especially when
ordinary words are used), the recognition of antonyms and contrasts,
and especially rhythm are guarantors of a deeper sense (untersinnig)
of unity that constantly accompanies the obvious meanings. This kind
of reading demands an observant short-term memory and multi-layered
recursions, which can never be sure that what is meant is also said.

Theoretical texts have still different demands. I am thinking here of
texts written in ordinary language, that is, not of texts written in
the secret language of mathematical or logical calculus. Even
scientists must write in sentences if they wish to publish. There is a
wide variety of word-choices available. Most readers of theoretical
texts cannot even imagine the large role of randomness in this
process. Indeed, even most writers usually do not make this clear to
themselves. The large majority of passages in a text could also have
been formulated differently; and they would have been formulated
differently if they had been written on another day. The large mass of
not especially significant words (Füllmasse) necessary for
formulating a sentence is not accessible to conceptual
regulation. Take the phrase “not accessible” in the previous
sentence, for example. This problem cannot be avoided. It cannot be
avoided even if we are very careful and pay a great deal of attention
to the differentiation and recognizability of those words which have
special conceptual importance. They will only form a very small part
of the entire text (Textmasse). And how shall a reader find these
words which are decisive?

This problem is especially prevalent in two cases, namely, in that of
a translator and in that of a beginner. In any case, especially with
these two classes of readers, I noticed how much my writing depends on
incidental circumstances—even though I am very careful in maintaining
and refining theoretical connections.

Translators not sufficiently acquainted with a given text’s
theoretical context often employ equal effort with regard to all the
words they find within a text. This does not mean that they will
translate “word for word” and follow the word order because this is
usually impossible. But they do not consider themselves justified in
playing with the large mass of not especially significant words. They
select among the many lexically similar equivalents which seem to
approach the intended meaning most closely. And I do not know how this
could be done differently without writing entirely different texts in
the other language. Theoretically interested readers should therefore
follow the advice of learning as many languages as possible in such a
way that they have at least passive mastery of them and thus can read
and understand them.

Beginners, especially beginning students, find that they are first
confronted with a mass of words, which are ordered in sentence-form,
which they read sentence by sentence, and which they can understand as
sentences. But what is important? What must be “learned?” What is
important, what is mere adornment? After a few pages of reading, one
can hardly remember what one has read. Which recommendations can be
offered?

One possibility is to remember names: Marx, Freud, Giddens, Bourdieu,
etc. Obviously most knowledge can also be ordered by names, eventually
also by names of theories such as social phenomenology, theory of
reception in the literary disciplines, etc. Even introductions to
sociology and basic texts are conceived in this way. What one cannot
learn from such works, however, are conceptual connections and
especially the nature of the problems that these texts try to
solve. Still, even candidates in exams at the end of their studies
want to be examined on Max Weber or, if that is too much, on Humberto
Maturana, and they are prepared to report on what they know about
these authors.

The problem of reading theoretical texts seems to consist in the fact
that they do not require just short-term memory but also long-term
memory in order to be able to distinguish between what is essential
and what is not essential and what is new from what is merely
repeated. But one cannot remember everything. This would simply be
learning by heart. In other words, one must read very selectively and
must be able to extract extensively networked references. One must be
able to understand recursions. But how can one learn these skills, if
no instructions can be given; or perhaps only about things that are
unusual like “recursion” in the previous sentences as opposed to
“must”?

Perhaps the best method would be to take notes—not excerpts, but
condensed reformulations of what has been read. The re-description of
what has already been described leads almost automatically to a
training of paying attention to “frames,” or schemata of
observation, or even to noticing conditions which lead the text to
offer some descriptions but not others. What is not meant, what is
excluded when something is asserted? If the text speaks of “human
rights,” what is excluded by the author? Non-human rights? Human
duties? Or is it comparing cultures or historical times that did not
know human rights and could live very well without them?

This leads to another question: what are we to do with what we have
written down? Certainly, at first we will produce mostly garbage. But
we have been educated to expect something useful from our activities
and soon lose confidence if nothing useful seems to result. We should
therefore reflect on whether and how we arrange our notes so that they
are available for later access. At least this should be a consoling
illusion. This requires a computer or a card file with numbered index
cards and an index. The constant accommodation of notes is then a
further step in our working process. It costs time, but it is also an
activity that goes beyond the mere monotony of reading and
incidentally trains our memory.

This could be the occasion to remember that the differentiation of
kinds of texts with which we started, originated only in the
eighteenth century. This holds for the modern novel as well as for
demanding (or as one might be tempted to say: multi-medial) poetry and
theoretical publications. Obviously this differentiation has been
influenced by book printing in all of its aspects. It could be that,
especially given the possibilities that computers offer, we now must
return to the achievements inherent in writing itself.
