---
title: The principle of computer science
date: 2022-10-17
---

Computer science has two parts.

First part, the study of computational model.

- Definition of computational model.
- Equivalence and difference between computational models.

Practice of software engineering.

- Understanding by simulation.
- Implementation of simulation.
  - Code that are easy to understand and change.

# About Code that are easy to understand and change

To study what is easy to understand,
we must first study how we understand.

A human can build internal models about the world,
and a human has language, he can express the ideas about models
by generating expressions, and other human can understand his expressions.

Code that are to understand and change to him,
must be familiar to him in this sense.

The expressions generated by a human are often linear and short,
complex ideas are explained by composition of many short expressions,
and there are many ways to do composition.

When a human talk, he can use short expressions to build up context.

Maybe writing computer programs in formal programming languages
are not far from this activities.

When defining a function, within the function body, we are in some context,
and the function body is composed of a (linear) sequence of short statements,
which further build up the context.

We are not used to deeply nested expressions,
and we are not used to very big context without well factored abstractions.

Maybe the design of tactics in languages like Coq and Lean are on the point.
Because comparing to normal programming languages, the way of building context
and doing composition are rich, the same for monad,
which is about defining new way of composition.

But maybe, all compositions are one composition.

Human process expressions in a linear way,
maybe this is a point against lisp's nested sexp.
